Paper Begins Here.

Title:
Evaluating Generative AI Systems is a Social Science Measurement Challenge

Abstract:
Across academia, industry, and government, there is an increasing awareness that
the measurement tasks involved in evaluating generative AI (GenAI) systems are
especially difficult. We argue that these measurement tasks are highly reminiscent
of measurement tasks found throughout the social sciences. With this in mind, we
present a framework, grounded in measurement theory from the social sciences,
for measuring concepts related to the capabilities, impacts, opportunities, and risks
of GenAI systems. The framework distinguishes between four levels: the background concept, the systematized concept, the measurement instrument(s), and the
instance-level measurements themselves. This four-level approach differs from the
way measurement is typically done in ML, where researchers and practitioners appear to jump straight from background concepts to measurement instruments, with
little to no explicit systematization in between. As well as surfacing assumptions,
thereby making it easier to understand exactly what the resulting measurements
do and do not mean, this framework has two important implications for evaluating
evaluations: First, it can enable stakeholders from different worlds to participate in
conceptual debates, broadening the expertise involved in evaluating GenAI systems.
Second, it brings rigor to operational debates by offering a set of lenses for interrogating the validity of measurement instruments and their resulting measurements.

1: Measurement and its Role in Evaluating GenAI Systems

Evaluating an ML system means making evaluative judgements about that system’s capabilities,
impacts, opportunities, and risks in order to facilitate decisions like whether it should be used for a
particular purpose, whether it should be deployed in a particular context, or even whether it should be
redesigned. However, we cannot make such evaluative judgements without accurate information about
systems’ capabilities, impacts, opportunities, and risks. Often, this information takes the form of measurements on nominal, ordinal, interval, and ratio scales, where each measurement reflects the amount
of some concept of interest—be it a concept related to capabilities, like reasoning skills; a concept
related to impacts, like causing a user to feel harmed; a concept related to opportunities, like the possibility of helping a user complete a certain type of task; or a concept related to risks, like the possibility
of privacy violations. Such measurements are obtained via the process of measurement, which can
involve both qualitative and quantitative approaches. Thus, measurement is often central to evaluation.
Across academia, industry, and government [e.g., 10, 22, 23], there is an increasing awareness that
the measurement tasks involved in evaluating generative AI (GenAI) systems are especially difficult—
more so than those involved in evaluating supervised ML systems. This is because the concepts to
be measured tend to be complex and nuanced, and may even have contested meanings [e.g., 18, 19]
across and within use cases, cultures, and languages. Although ML researchers and practitioners
have proposed myriad approaches and instruments intended to measure such concepts, it is often very
difficult to know whether these approaches and instruments yield reliable and valid measurements.
We argue that the measurement tasks involved in evaluating GenAI systems are highly reminiscent
of measurement tasks found throughout the social sciences. Social scientists have been thoughtfully
measuring complex and contested concepts—ideology, democracy, media bias, framing, to name a
few—for over fifty years [e.g., 3, 25]. Thus, our perspective is that the ML community would benefit
from learning from and drawing on the social sciences when developing approaches and instruments
for measuring concepts related to the capabilities, impacts, opportunities, and risks of GenAI systems.

2: A Measurement Framework for GenAI Systems

When measuring complex and contested concepts, social scientists often turn to measurement theory,
which offers a framework for articulating distinctions between concepts and their operationalizations
via measurement instruments—i.e., the procedures and artifacts used to obtain measurements of those
concepts, such as classifiers, annotation guidelines, scoring rules—and a set of lenses for interrogating the validity of measurement instruments and their resulting measurements [e.g., 2, 12, 17].
The framework, as formulated by Adcock and Collier [2], provides a structured approach for producing measurements that reflect complex concepts. It distinguishes between four levels: the background
concept or “broad constellation of meanings and understandings associated with [the] concept;”
the systematized concept or “specific formulation of the concept[, which] commonly involves an
explicit definition;” the measurement instrument(s) used to produce instance-level measurements;
and the instance-level measurements themselves [2]. These four levels are linked by three processes:
systematization, operationalization, and application, as shown in Figure 1. Note that we use slightly
different terminology to Adcock and Collier; the ideas remain unchanged, however. For example,
when measuring the prevalence of demeaning text generated by a GenAI system, the background
concept encompasses all possible definitions of “demeaning text.” From here, we might select a single
definition like “system [...] outputs with dehumanizing or offensive associations, or which otherwise
threaten people’s sense of security or dignity” [5]. However, since this definition itself encompasses
a broad range of meanings and understandings, it must be further systematized, perhaps into a set
of linguistic patterns that equate a particular social group to an animal, advocate for animal-like
treatment of the group, equate the group to an inanimate object, note qualities of the group that are
like those of an inanimate object, equate the group to a disease or disorder, etc. [11]. Collectively,
these linguistic patterns constitute the systematized concept. Finally, we might operationalize
this systematized concept via an ML classifier trained to identify each of these linguistic patterns
in system outputs, resulting in instance-level measurements that comprise a set of binary labels
indicating the presence or absence of one or more of the linguistic patterns in each system output.
This approach differs from the way measurement is typically done in ML, where researchers and
practitioners appear to jump straight from background concepts to measurement instruments, with
little to no explicit systematization in between [e.g., 4, 6, 9, 13, 16]. However, the systematization
process is particularly important when measuring complex and contested concepts like those related
to the capabilities, impacts, opportunities, and risks of GenAI systems. Without an explicitly
systematized concept, it is hard to know exactly what is being operationalized, and thus measured. For
example, StereoSet [20] and CrowS-Pairs [21], two widely used benchmarks in NLP for measuring
stereotyping, appear to jump straight from high-level definitions of the concept, encompassing broad
constellations of meanings and understandings, to specific measurement instruments, obscuring
exactly what those instruments measure [7]. Both benchmarks’ measurement instruments rely on
crowdworkers, who, in the absence of an explicitly systematized concept, must rely on their own
understandings of these high-level definitions, which may be contradictory. A similar critique also
applies to recent work on measuring stereotypes in the context of text-to-image generation [8, 14].

3: Evaluating Evaluations of GenAI Systems

Figure 1: Measurement in the social sciences, as formulated by Adcock and Collier [2]. The four
levels—the background concept, the systematized concept, the measurement instrument(s), and the
instance-level measurements—are linked by three processes—systematization, operationalization,
and application. We also indicate where conceptual debates and operational debates occur. Note that
we use slightly different terminology to Adcock and Collier; the ideas remain unchanged, however.

This framework surfaces assumptions, thereby making it easier to understand exactly what the
resulting measurements do and do not mean. It also separates conceptual debates—i.e., does our
systematized concept capture what we want it to capture?—from operational debates—i.e., did we
operationalize the systematized concept in a way that yields reliable and valid measurements? We
argue that this separation has two important implications for evaluating evaluations, outlined below.
First, systematization can enable stakeholders from different worlds—e.g., open-source developers,
policymakers, users, members of marginalized communities, all of whom may be interested in measuring a concept for different reasons—to participate in conceptual debates and thus advocate for particular meanings and understandings. Measuring a complex and contested concept necessarily means
making choices about which of its meanings and understandings will be reflected in the resulting
measurements and which will not. For example, hate speech can be understood from a practical perspective as speech that promotes violence [1] or from a normative perspective as speech that “den[ies]
the basic standing of [...] vulnerable social groups” [15]. Without an explicitly systematized concept,
many of these choices are accessible only indirectly via the measurement instrument(s), which may
be hard for stakeholders other than ML researchers and practitioners to engage with. We therefore
argue that systematization can help broaden the expertise involved in evaluating GenAI systems.
Second, systematization brings rigor to operational debates. When measuring complex and contested
concepts, there are no directly observable, universally agreed-upon labels or scores against which to
evaluate the resulting measurements, making operational debates fraught. Measurement theory therefore offers a set of lenses for interrogating the validity of measurement instruments and their resulting
measurements: face validity, content validity, convergent validity, discriminant validity, predictive
validity, hypothesis validity, and consequential validity [e.g., 13]. Each lens constitutes a different
source of evidence about validity. For example, content validity focuses on whether a measurement
instrument captures all relevant aspects of a systematized concept, while convergent validity focuses
on whether the resulting measurements are similar to measurements obtained using other (already validated) instruments for measuring that systematized concept. Distinguishing between the background
concept and the systematized concept is crucial to obtaining meaningful evidence about validity using
this set of lenses: “If [we] seek to establish [...] validity in relation to a background concept with multiple competing meanings, [we] may find a different answer [...] for each meaning” [2]. As a result, we
again argue that systematization is important, this time because the existence of an explicitly systematized concept enables these lenses to play a crucial role in evaluating evaluations of GenAI systems.

4: Broader Impacts and Limitations

In calling on the ML community to learn from and draw on the social sciences when developing
approaches and instruments for measuring concepts related to the capabilities, impacts, opportunities,
and risks of GenAI systems, we may be misunderstood as recommending that the ML community
adopt existing measurement instruments from the social sciences. Rather, we advocate for adopting
the framework that social scientists often turn to for measurement; we do not advocate for naïvely
transferring measurement instruments designed for humans (e.g., competency tests) to the context of
GenAI systems. Effectively adapting existing measurement instruments requires carefully thinking
through precisely the kinds of conceptual and operational questions that the framework described
in Section 2 highlights. In this regard, our perspective is similar to that of Wang et al. [24], who
advocate for taking a construct-oriented approach when evaluating GenAI systems by drawing on
psychometrics; they too caution against naïvely using measurement instruments designed for humans.
Likewise, in suggesting that the framework described in Section 2 can make evaluations of GenAI
systems more rigorous, we do not mean to suggest that better measurements will inevitably improve
how GenAI systems are developed, deployed, used, or regulated. The social sciences themselves
have repeatedly demonstrated that better understanding of a problem does not automatically translate
into better policy. Although using the framework can help clear up conceptual confusion, broaden the
expertise involved in evaluating GenAI systems, and yield more valid measurements, it needs to be
accompanied by sustained efforts to meaningfully inject research into policymaking and practice.
Although the measurement approaches and instruments proposed by ML researchers and practitioners
tend to be quantitative, the process of measurement can involve both qualitative and quantitative
approaches. As result, we emphasize that the framework described in Section 2 supports both
qualitative and quantitative approaches. Indeed, Adcock and Collier [2] stated that their framework,
which forms the basis of ours, was intended to be a shared standard that would allow “quantitative and
qualitative scholars to assess more effectively, and communicate about, issues of valid measurement.”
Finally, we stress that our suggestions are not a panacea. Even when evaluations of GenAI systems are
grounded in measurement theory, they may fall short of what we would like them to accomplish. If
anything, the framework described in Section 2 will often reveal the shortcomings of evaluations—i.e.,
the ways they depart from what their designers hoped to achieve. Rather than thinking of measurement
theory as a solution to all the problems that beset evaluations of GenAI systems, we think of it
as a way to appropriately and precisely qualify exactly what measurement instruments measure.


Paper Ends Here.
